---
title: Insert title here
key: 019c08546179ae6a555ea3851cb638c0
video_link:
  mp3: http://assets.datacamp.com/production/repositories/4116/datasets/91a5d9e8f7ffaa80660c7eecb83d89acdeddff6d/Final%20audition%20-%20mono.mp3

---
## Functions That Return System Date and Time Values

```yaml
type: "TitleSlide"
key: "7b3a878083"
```

`@lower_third`

name: Ana Voicu
title: Data Journalist


`@script`
Working with date and time data types has proven not to be an easy task and it’s a common source of mistakes and frustrations.


---
## Common Mistakes When Working With Dates and Time

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "370afee79c"
```

`@part1`
- Inconsistency between the value being passed to database and the actual type in the database
- Inconsistent date time formats or patterns
- Arithmetic operations
- Issues with time zones
- Datetime serialization


`@script`
For example it happens so often to have:
Inconsistency between the value being passed to database and the actual type in the database
Inconsistent date time formats or patterns
Arithmetic operations on date types produce sometimes a different result than what we would expect and the examples can continue.

Well, many of these issues appear because we don’t really reserve some time to actually understand the date and time types and the built-in functions that SQL Server provides for manipulating this kind of data. The results which we find quite surprising are not caused by poor data type management in the database engine, but by using the wrong type or the wrong function and expecting the right results.
Let’s dive together into these types and see how, when and where we should use the date and time functions.


---
## Functions that return the date and time of the operating system

```yaml
type: "TwoColumns"
key: "d014b746b3"
```

`@part1`
Higher-precision

- SYSDATETIME() 
- SYSUTCDATETIME() 
- SYSUTCDATETIMEOFFSET()


`@part2`
Lower-precision

- CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
- GETDATE()
- GETUTCDATE()


`@script`
I’m going to start with some built-in functions for getting time out of your system. 
What does “your system” mean? It means your operating system and its settings. So the system information is information that can be retrieved from the OS installed on the computer where SQL Server is installed. Obviously, all these functions are non deterministic because, no matter how much we would want to stop it, time flies. And these functions reflect very precise this sad reality. 

Talking about precision, the system date and time functions are split into two categories:
Higher-precision, measured by fractional seconds precision (returning a datetime2 data type)
And lower precision (returning a datetime data type)

Let’s take them by turn.
The high-precision functions are:
SYSDATETIME - which returns the computer’s date and time, without the timezone offset
SYSUTCDATETIME - this one returns the computer’s date and time as UTC time (the Universal Time Coordinate)
and last, but not least,  SYSUTCDATETIMEOFFSET returns the computer’s date and time, together with the timezone offset. 

The other ones, the lower-precisions, but important nonetheless are:
CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
GETDATE
And GETUTCDATE. 
These functions perform basically the same tasks as the previous ones, but they return a datetime type instead of datetime2, so their precision is not that accurate.


---
## Let's see them in practice...

```yaml
type: "TwoRows"
key: "d55926e3f1"
```

`@part1`
```sql
SELECT 
     SYSDATETIME()			AS [SYSDATETIME] 
    ,SYSDATETIMEOFFSET()	  AS [SYSDATETIMEOFFSET]  
    ,SYSUTCDATETIME()		 AS [SYSUTCDATETIME] 
    ,CURRENT_TIMESTAMP		AS [CURRENT_TIMESTAMP] 
    ,GETDATE()			    AS [GETDATE] 
    ,GETUTCDATE()		     AS [GETUTCDATE]; 
```


`@part2`
|[SYSDATETIME]                |[SYSDATETIMEOFFSET]               |[SYSUTCDATETIME]           |[CURRENT_TIMESTAMP]    |[GETDATE]              |[GETUTCDATE]           |
| --------------------------- |----------------------------------|---------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|
| 2018-11-22 13:57:29.7779269 |2018-11-22 13:57:29.7779269 +02:00|2018-11-22 11:57:29.7779269|2018-11-22 13:57:29.777|2018-11-22 13:57:29.777|2018-11-22 11:57:29.777|


`@script`
Let’s see them in action.

I’m going to execute a simple query that calls all these functions. What do we see is that the there are different values between the functions that return the time as it is set locally on the computer and the ones that return the UTC time. This is because I am on the UTC+2 time zone at this moment. If I were to change this setting on my PC, the results would be different. 
Also, you see my timezone offset in the result return by the SYSUTCDATETIMEOFFSET function.


---
## What is all we want is the date?

```yaml
type: "TwoRows"
key: "01f18edccc"
center_content: false
```

`@part1`
```sql
SELECT 
     CONVERT (date, SYSDATETIME())         AS [SYSDATETIME] 
    ,CONVERT (date, SYSDATETIMEOFFSET())   AS [SYSDATETIMEOFFSET] 
    ,CONVERT (date, SYSUTCDATETIME())      AS [SYSUTCDATETIME] 
    ,CONVERT (date, CURRENT_TIMESTAMP)     AS [CURRENT_TIMESTAMP]
    ,CONVERT (date, GETDATE())             AS [GETDATE] 
    ,CONVERT (date, GETUTCDATE())          AS [GETUTCDATE]
```


`@part2`
|**[SYSDATETIME]**|**[SYSDATETIMEOFFSET]**|**[SYSUTCDATETIME]**|**[CURRENT_TIMESTAMP]**|**[GETDATE]**       |**[GETUTCDATE]**|
|-----------------|------------------|---------------|------------------|---------------|---------------|
|2018-11-22       |2018-11-22|2018-11-22|2018-11-22|2018-11-22|2018-11-22|


`@script`
So what if we want to get only the date, what do we do, which function should we use? 
Well, all of them will return the same results (unless it’s passed midnight in one timezone and before midnight in UTC time or the other way around). The only thing we need to do is to convert the result to a date data type (instead of datetime or datetime2) and we have our results. The most common function used in practice for getting the current date is GETDATE(). It’s simple, easy to remember and gives you what you need.


---
## About what if all we want is time?

```yaml
type: "TwoRows"
key: "ac116787e8"
```

`@part1`
```sql
SELECT 
     CONVERT (time, SYSDATETIME())       AS [SYSDATETIME] 
    ,CONVERT (time, SYSDATETIMEOFFSET()) AS [SYSDATETIMEOFFSET] 
    ,CONVERT (time, SYSUTCDATETIME())    AS [SYSUTCDATETIME] 
    ,CONVERT (time, CURRENT_TIMESTAMP)   AS [CURRENT_TIMESTAMP]
    ,CONVERT (time, GETDATE())           AS [GETDATE] 
    ,CONVERT (time, GETUTCDATE())        AS [GETUTCDATE]
```


`@part2`
|**[SYSDATETIME]**    |**[SYSDATETIMEOFFSET]**|**[SYSUTCDATETIME]**|**[CURRENT_TIMESTAMP]**|**[GETDATE]**       |**[GETUTCDATE]**    |
|----------------|------------------|---------------|------------------|---------------|---------------|
|14:16:32.8944679 |14:16:32.8944679   |12:16:32.8944679|14:16:32.8933333   |14:16:32.8933333|12:16:32.8933333|


`@script`
And if we want to get only the time, instead of converting to date, we convert to time. Like this.


---
## Let's practice!

```yaml
type: "FinalSlide"
key: "63fe98d6a1"
```

`@script`


